---
title: RFC Evaluation Project - First Step
abbrev: RFC-Eval
docname: draft-huitema-rfc-eval-project-latest
category: info
date: 2019

stand_alone: yes

ipr: trust200902
area: General
kw: Internet-Draft

coding: us-ascii
pi: [toc,  sortrefs, symrefs, comments]

author:
      -
        ins: C. Huitema
        name: Christian Huitema
        org: Private Octopus Inc.
        street: Golfcourse Rd
        city: Friday Harbor
        code: WA 98250
        country: U.S.A
        email: huitema@huitema.net

--- abstract

This document presents a first attempt at evaluating the production of the IETF.
We analyze a set of randomly chosen RFC approved in 2018, looking for history
and delays, and using Google Scholar as a proxy for the RFC popularity. The
results are interesting, and inform further evaluation efforts.

--- middle

# RFC Evaluation project

As stated on the organization's web site, "The IETF is a large open international
community of network designers, operators, vendors, and researchers concerned with
the evolution of the Internet architecture and the smooth operation of the Internet."
In this memo, we start exploring how the IETF could possibly be evaluated, and we
do so by attempting to evaluate the RFC production process.

The IETF data tracker provides information about RFC and drafts, from which we can
infer statistics about the production system. We can measure how
long it takes to drive a proposition from initial draft to final publication,
and how these delays can be split between Working Group discussions, IETF reviews,
IESG assessment, RFC Editor delays and final reviews by the authors.

Just measuring production delays may be misleading. The IETF
produces standard proposals and informative memos that get published in the RFC
series, but that is not its only purpose. Two other purposes would be the
organization of fruitful discussions between members of the technical community,
and the filtering of ill-thought proposals so they are not endorsed in
IETF publications.

To try assess this other purposes, we have to find ways to measure the impact
of the documents that were published. If the communication between participants
was efficient, the documents should be easily accepted by the community. If bad
ideas were filtered, the specifications should lead to deployed product and
services with good feedback.

A potential failure mode of the IETF is to do too much filtering. After all,
classifying a proposal as ill-thought or potentially harmful is subjective.
A comprehensive analysis would look at the fate of proposals that were not
accepted by the IETF but got developed in other ways and became eventually
successful. We will not try to assess that in this memo, but further
studies migh consider the issue.

# Methodology

In this exploration, we want to evaluate not just the mechanics of the RFC
production, but also the quality and impact of the results. This evaluation of
quality and impact is subjective. We start with two ideas:

1- Use Google Scholar to assess the citation counts of published documents

2- Ask the RFC authors whether the specifications resulted in the
   deployment of products or services

Basic production mechanisms could be evaluated by processing data from
the IETF tracker, but subjective data requires manual assessment of results,
which can be time consuming. Google Scholar also requires manual access
because the site does not offer an open API.
Since our resources are limited, we will only
perform this analysis for a small sample of RFC, selected at random
from the list of RFC approved in 2018. Specifically, we will pick
10 RFC at random between:

* RFC 8307, published in January 2018, and

* RFC 8511, published December 2018.

In order to avoid injecting personal bias in the random selecton, we use
a random selection process similar to the Nomination Committee selection
process defined in {{?RFC3797}}. The process is seeded with the text string
"vanitas vanitatum et omnia vanitas", and the results are:

~~~ 
Picking 20 numbers between 8307 and 8511,
using MD5(vanitas vanitatum et omnia vanitas)
Rank 1: 8411 -- md5=daba041224a879199b698748808f917d
Rank 2: 8456 -- md5=f5570484d91ada6a672edbdca61d808c
Rank 3: 8446 -- md5=8340e918bb8faf69d197f79c9a58d7b8
Rank 4: 8355 -- md5=19474df74efd9917cf3fe8acce2ac374
Rank 5: 8441 -- md5=5acce2b730f3c24a4a91a5fc1921d1cd
Rank 6: 8324 -- md5=411c11a1cf4c292f83458865599c6921
Rank 7: 8377 -- md5=ac16a89192c0f0727febd35aacbc1f24
Rank 8: 8498 -- md5=bba44f2ba1ab240a1265a82ab71f7e02
Rank 9: 8479 -- md5=1653606b0af95d529a473a8f85ffaea4
Rank 10: 8453 -- md5=0cbfe105667c5a83b027dcfa85062f98
Rank 11: 8429 -- md5=fa51d7738562d990926a0d199fb060b8
Rank 12: 8312 -- md5=96d061523b1a57343356ae7a1e498ca5
Rank 13: 8492 -- md5=1b72b746eb05f79af40ed2bd3faccbe8
Rank 14: 8378 -- md5=645833b936d36cdcc797256518d7c483
Rank 15: 8361 -- md5=2064622c868e410beb0d9c18d0cb522c
Rank 16: 8472 -- md5=ca8a823072a21df011d0ea8b96a6aa47
Rank 17: 8471 -- md5=01b293a7dd0793e6f3297f2a973cd7e3
Rank 18: 8466 -- md5=8e411babe271557fe83bcdececc1643f
Rank 19: 8362 -- md5=8a1ba3efd82856a12b2b35fc5237e1b7
Rank 20: 8468 -- md5=57ae50ee0e1e0708d356d96d116dbfe1
~~~


# Observations

We examine the 20 RFC in the sample, measuring various characteristics such
as delay and citation counts, in an attempt to identify patterns in the
IETF processes.

## Publication delays

We look at the distribution of delays between the submission of the first
draft and the publication of the RFC. We break out the total delay in three
components:

* The working group delay, from the first draft to the start of the IETF
  last call;

* The IETF delay, which lasts from the beginning of the IETF last call to
  the approval by the IESG, including the reviews by
  various directorates;

* The RFC production, from approval by the IESG to publication, including
  the Auth48 reviews.

For submissions to the independent stream, we don't have a working group.
We consider instead the progression of the individual draft until the
adoption by the ISE as the equivalent of the "working group" period, 
and the delay from adoption by the ISE until submission to the RFC Editor
as the equivalent of the IETF delay. The following table
shows the delays for the 20 RFC in the sample:

| RFC | Status | Pages | Overall | WG | IETF | Edit |
| ---:| ----  | ----:| -----:| ---:| ---:| ---:|
| 8411 | Info | 5 | 455 | 154 | 140 | 161 |
| 8456 | Info | 64 | 1107 | 823 | 126 | 158 |
| 8446 | PS | 160 | 1576 | 1400 | 34 | 142 |
| 8355 | Info | 13 | 1517 | 1175 | 243 | 99 |
| 8441 | PS | 8 | 341 | 204 | 31 | 106 |
| 8324 | ISE | 29 | 270 | 38 | 161 | 71 |
| 8377 | PS | 8 | 1792 | 1630 | 21 | 141 |
| 8498 | Info | 15 | 1061 | 935 | 59 | 67 |
| 8479 | ISE | 8 | 414 | 233 | 144 | 37 |
| 8453 | Info | 42 | 1162 | 1036 | 46 | 80 |
| 8429 | BCP | 10 | 548 | 76 | 313 | 159 |
| 8312 | Info | 18 | 1255 | 1113 | 16 | 126 |
| 8492 | ISE | 40 | 2358 | 1706 | 172 | 480 |
| 8378 | Exp | 21 | 1524 | 1446 | 27 | 51 |
| 8361 | PS | 17 | 1612 | 1477 | 62 | 73 |
| 8472 | PS | 8 | 1228 | 899 | 249 | 80 |
| 8466 | PS | 158 | 771 | 538 | 124 | 109 |
| 8362 | PS | 33 | 1871 | 1766 | 41 | 64 |
| 8468 | Info | 15 | 1196 | 979 | 90 | 127 |
| ---:| ----  | ----:| -----:| ---:| ---:| ---:|
| | average | 35 | 1161 | 928 | 110 | 123 |

The average delay from first draft to publication is about 3 years, but this
varies widely. Excluding the independent stream submissions, the average
delay from start to finish is 3 years and 3 months, of which on average
2 years and 8 months are spent getting consensus in the working group.

The longest delay is found for {{?RFC8492}}, 6.5 years from start to finish.
This is however a very special case, a draft that was prepared for
the TLS working group and failed to reach consensus. After that, it was
resubmitted to the ISE, and incurred atypical production delays.

On average, we see that 80% of the delay is incurred in WG processing,
10% in IETF review, and 10% for edition and publication.

## Independent Series

Out of 20 randomly selected RFC, 3 were published through the "independent series".
One is an independent opinion, another a description of a non-IETF protocol
format, and the third was {{?RFC8492}}, which is a special case. Apart from
this special case, the publication delays were significantly shorter 
for the Independent Stream than for the IETF stream.
This seems to indicate that the Independent Series is functioning as 
expected.

The authors of these 3 RFC are regular IETF contributors. This
pbservation motivated a secondary analysis of all the RFC
published in the "independent" stream in 2018. There are 14 such RFC:
8507, 8494, 8493, 8492, 8483, 8479, 8433, 8409, 8374, 8369, 8367, 8351,
8328 and 8324. (RFC 8367 and 8369 were
published on 1 April 2018.) We can ask whether the authors of
these RFC are these outsiders, part of a "wider community" or are
people who are also contributing to the IETF. The overwhelming
response is, "insiders". Pretty much all the authors are or were
involved in the IETF, many of them with a prominent track record. There
are just 2 exceptions, a single RFC in which only 3 of the 5 authors are
well associated with the IETF.

## Citation Counts

Part of the exercise is to test whether citation counts provide a useful
measure of the popularity of the IETF production. These citation counts
vary widely:

| RFC | Status | Scholar |
| ---:| ----- | -----:|
| 8411 | Info | 2 |
| 8456 | Info | 3 |
| 8446 | PS | 123 |
| 8355 | Info | 9 |
| 8441 | PS | 0 |
| 8324 | ISE | 2 |
| 8377 | PS | 1 |
| 8498 | Info | 0 |
| 8479 | ISE | 0 |
| 8453 | Info | 8 |
| 8429 | BCP | 1 |
| 8312 | Info | 9 |
| 8492 | ISE | 2 |
| 8378 | Exp | 1 |
| 8361 | PS | 1 |
| 8472 | PS | 5 |
| 8466 | PS | 2 |
| 8362 | PS | 7 |
| 8468 | Info | 2 |


The results indicate that {{?RFC8446}} is by far the most popular of the 20
RFC in our sample. This is not surprising, since TLS is a key Internet Protocol.
Of the other publications, only 4 have 5 to 9 citations, and the others have
three or less.
We need however to be a bit cautious before asserting that publications with
a low citation count have limited impact:

* some documents may well accumulate more citations over time. For example,
  {{?RFC8377}} updates {{?RFC6455}}. There are more than 1000 citations of
  {{?RFC6455}} on Google Scholar. We might expect that the citation count
  of {{?RFC8377}} will increase in the coming years.

* citation counts largely come from academic publications, and thus reflect
  popularity within researchers more than popularity with network operators
  and vendors.

We should be able to assess the popularity of specifications with vendors,
operators and designers by asking questions about deployed services and products.


## Preparation and Publication delays

The preparation and publication delays include three components: 

* the delay from submission to the RFC Editor to beginning of Auth48, during 
  which the document is prepared;

* the AUTH48 delay, during which authors review and eventually approve the
  changes proposed by the editors;

* the publication delay, from final agreement by authors and editors to
  actual publication.

The breakdown of the publication delays for each RFC is shown in the
following table.

| RFC | Status | Pages | RFC edit | Auth 48 | RFC Pub | Edit(total) |
| ---:| ----- | -----:| -----:| -----:| -----:| -----:|
| 8411 | Info | 5 | 53 | 88 | 20 | 161 |
| 8456 | Info | 64 | 98 | 46 | 14 | 158 |
| 8446 | PS | 160 | 85 | 57 | 0 | 142 |
| 8355 | Info | 13 | 83 | 15 | 1 | 99 |
| 8441 | PS | 8 | 67 | 33 | 6 | 106 |
| 8324 | ISE | 29 | 42 | 28 | 1 | 71 |
| 8377 | PS | 8 | 39 | 102 | 0 | 141 |
| 8498 | Info | 15 | 49 | 16 | 2 | 67 |
| 8479 | ISE | 8 | 31 | 5 | 1 | 37 |
| 8453 | Info | 42 | 73 | 7 | 0 | 80 |
| 8429 | BCP | 10 | 60 | 99 | 0 | 159 |
| 8312 | Info | 18 | 96 | 30 | 0 | 126 |
| 8492 | ISE | 40 | 355 | 123 | 2 | 480 |
| 8378 | Exp | 21 | 42 | 9 | 0 | 51 |
| 8361 | PS | 17 | 39 | 31 | 3 | 73 |
| 8472 | PS | 8 | 59 | 8 | 13 | 80 |
| 8466 | PS | 158 | 84 | 22 | 3 | 109 |
| 8362 | PS | 33 | 49 | 11 | 4 | 64 |
| 8468 | Info | 15 | 65 | 53 | 9 | 127 |
|  | Average |  | 77.3 | 41.2 | 4.2 | 122.7 |
|-8492  | Average |  | 62 | 37 | 4 | 103 |

On average, the total delay appears to be a bit more than four month, but the
average is skewed by the extreme values encountered for {{?RFC8492}}. If we
exclude that RFC from the computations, the average delay drops to a just a bit
more than 3 months: about 2 months for the preparation, a bit more than one
month for the Auth48 phase, and 4 days for the publishing. 

Of course, these delays vary from RFC to RFC. To try explain the causes of the
delay, we compute the correlation factor between the observed delays and 4
plausible explanation factors:

* The number of pages in the document,
* The amount of copy edit, as discussed in (#copy-editing),
* Whether or not an IANA action was required.

We find the following values:

| Correlation | RFC edit | Auth 48 | Edit(total) |
| ----- | -----:| -----:| -----:| -----:|
| Nb pages | 0.50 | -0.04 | 0.21 |
| Copy-Edit | 0.42 | 0.24 | 0.45 |
| IANA | -0.13 | 0.26 | 0.15 |

None of these indicate strong correlations. The greater number of pages will
tend to increase the preparation delay, but it does not appear to impact the
Auth48 delay at all. The amount of copy editing also tend to increase the
the preparation delay somewhat and the Auth48 delay a little. The presence or
absence of IANA action has very ittle correlation with the delays.

We also observe that the Auth48 delay varies much more than the preparation
delay, with a standard deviation of 20 days for Auth48 versus 10 days for
the preparation delay. In theory, Auth48 is just a final
verification: the authors receive the document prepared by the RFC production center,
and just have to give their approval, or maybe request a last minute
correction. The name indicates that this is expected to last just two days, but
in average it lasts more than a month.

There are a few RFC for which the Auth48 delay was much longer than a month:
RFC 8411, 8456, 8446, 8377, 8429, 8492 and 8468. We asked the authors
of these RFC why the AUTH48 phase took so long, and we got
two explanations:

1- Some RFC have multiple authors in multiple time zones. This slows down
   the coordination required for approving changes.

2- Some authors found some of the proposed changes unnecessary or
   undesirable, and asked that they be reversed. This required long
   exchanges between authors and editors.

## Copy editing

We can assess the amount of copy editing applied to each published RFC by
comparing the text of the draft approved for publication and the text of the
RFC. We do expect differences in the "boilerplate" and in the IANA section,
but we will also see differences due to copy editing. Assessing the amount
of copy editing is subjective, and we do it using a scale of 1 to 4:

1- Minor editing

2- Editing for style, such as capitalization, hyphens, that versus which,
   and expending all acronyms at least one.

3- Editing for clarity in addition to style, such as rewriting ambiguous
   sentences and clarifying use of internal references. For Yang models,
   that may include model corrections suggested by the verifier.

4- Extensive editing.

The following table shows that with about half of the RFC required
editing for style, and the other half at least some editing for clarity.

| RFC | Status | Copy Edit |
| ---:| ----- | -----:|
| 8411 | Info | 2 |
| 8456 | Info | 4 |
| 8446 | PS | 3 |
| 8355 | Info | 2 |
| 8441 | PS | 2 |
| 8324 | ISE | 2 |
| 8377 | PS | 3 |
| 8498 | Info | 3 |
| 8479 | ISE | 1 |
| 8453 | Info | 2 |
| 8429 | BCP | 2 |
| 8312 | Info | 2 |
| 8492 | ISE | 3 |
| 8378 | Exp | 2 |
| 8361 | PS | 2 |
| 8472 | PS | 2 |
| 8466 | PS | 3 |
| 8362 | PS | 3 |
| 8468 | Info | 3 |

We should note that this method of assessment does not take into account
the number of changes proposed by the editors and eventually rejected
by the authors, since these changes are not present in either the
final draft or the published RFC. It might be possible to get
an evaluation of these "phantom changes" from the RFC Production Center.

# Next steps

This draft is not complete. We have obtained feedback from some authors
but not all, and we are still awaiting more data from authors about deployments
and delays. We should also get a review from the RFC Production Center.

Even with those limitations, the exercise shows some promise, and also
shows the interest of doing more studies. For example, one of the plausible
questions is whether the IETF impact is increasing or decreasing over time.
We could do that by repeating the statistical sampling analysis for previous
years, for example 2008 and 1998.

# Security considerations

This draft does not specify any protocol.

We might want to analyze whether security issues were discovered after
publication of specific standards.

# IANA Considerations

This draft does not require any IANA action.

Peliminary analysis does not indicate that IANA is causing any particular
delay in the publication process.

# Acknowledgements

TBD

# Appendix: Analysis of 20 selected RFC

We review each of the RFC listed in (#methodology), trying both to answer the known
questions and to gather insight for further analyzes.

## 8411
IANA Registration for the Cryptographic Algorithm Object Identifier Range {{?RFC8411}}:

~~~ 
Informational, 5 pages
4 drafts (personal),first May 8, 2017. Published August 2018.
Last call announced 2017/10/09
IESG evaluation starts 2017/12/28
Approved 2018/02/26, draft 03
Auth 48 2018/04/20
Auth 48 complete 2018/07/17
Published 2018/08/06
IANA action: create table
~~~

The draft underwent minor copy edit before publication. 

The long delay in Auth48 is probaby due to clustering with {{?RFC8410}}, which entered
AUTH 48 on 06/05. The MISSREF tracker code was cleared then.

2 references on Google Scholar.

## 8456
Benchmarking Methodology for Software-Defined Networking (SDN) 
Controller Performance {{?RFC8456}}:

~~~
Informational, 64 pages
2 personal drafts, 9 WG drafts, first in March 2015
Last call announced 2018-01-19
IESG evaluation starts 2018-02-27
IESG approved 2018-05-25
Auth 48 2018-08-31
Auth 48 complete 2018-10-16
Published 2018-10-30
~~~

The draft underwent very extensive copy editing, covering use of articles, turn of phrases, choice
of vocabulary. The changes are enough to cause pagination differences. The "diff" tool marks pretty
much every page as changed. Some diagrams see change in protocol elements like message names.

The RFC was part of cluster with {{?RFC8455}}.

Google Scholar shows 3 references.

## 8446
The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.3 {{?RFC8446}}

~~~
Proposed standard
160 pages
29 WG drafts first April 17, 2014.
Last call announced 2018/02/15
IESG evaluation starts 2018/03/02
Approved 2018/03/21, draft 28
Auth 48 2018/06/14
Auth 48 complete 2018/08/10
Published 2018/08/10
~~~

Copy editing includes explaining acronyms on first use, clarifying some definitions 
standardizing punctiation and capitalization, and spelling out some numbers in text.
This generally fall in the category of "style", although some of the clarifications
go into message definitions.

123 references in Google Scholar.

## 8355
Resiliency Use Cases in Source Packet Routing in Networking (SPRING) Networks {{?RFC8355}}

~~~
Informational, 13 pages.
2 personal drafts (personal), first January 31, 2014. 13 WG drafts.
Last call announced 2017-04-20
IESG evaluation starts 2017-05-04, draft 09
Approved 2017-12-19, draft 12
Auth 48 2018-03-12
Auth 48 complete 2018-03-27
Published 2018-03-28
~~~

Minor set of copy edit, mostly for style.

It appears that publication waited for availability of RFC 8354. There is no formal dependency
between the two RFC, but they appear to have been clustered.

9 references on Google Scholar.

## 8441
Bootstrapping WebSockets with HTTP/2 {{?RFC8441}}

~~~
Proposed standard, 8 pages. Updates RFC 6455.
3 personal drafts (personal), first 10/15/2017. 8 WG drafts.
Last call announced 2018-05-07, draft 05
IESG evaluation starts 2018-05-29, draft 06
Approved 2018-06-07, draft 07
Auth 48 2018-08-13
Auth 48 complete 2018-09-15
Published 2018-09-21
IANA Action: table entries
~~~

Minor set of copy edit, mostly for style.

No references on Google Scholar. (RFC 6455 had 1000 results)


## 8324
DNS Privacy, Authorization, Special Uses, Encoding, Characters, Matching, and Root Structure:
Time for Another Look? {{?RFC8324}}

~~~
Informational, 29 pages. Independent stream.
5 personal drafts (personal), first June 2, 2017.
ISE review started 2017-07-10, draft 03
IETF conflict review and IESG review started 2017-10-29 
Approved 2017-12-18, draft 04
Auth 48 2018-01-29, draft 05
Auth 48 complete 2018-02-26
Published 2018-02-27
~~~

Minor copy edit, mostly for style. One whole paragraph added in conclusion.

2 reference on Google Scholar.



## 8377
Transparent Interconnection of Lots of Links (TRILL): Multi-Topology {{?RFC8377}}

~~~
Proposed standard, 20 pages. Updates RFC 6325, 7177.
3 personal drafts (personal), first September 3, 2013. 7 WG drafts.
Last call announced 2018-02-19, draft 05
IESG evaluation starts 2018-03-02, draft 06
Approved 2018-03-12, draft 05
Auth 48 2018-04-20, draft 06
Auth 48 complete 2018-07-31
Published 2018-07-31
IANA Table, table entries
~~~

Minor set of copy edit, mostly for style, also clarity.

1 reference on Google Scholar.

[[TODO: Ask authors why it took so long to get the draft adopted by the WG]]

## 8498
A P-Served-User Header Field Parameter for an Originating Call Diversion (CDIV)
Session Case in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) {{?RFC8498}}.

~~~
Informational, 15 pages.
5 personal drafts (personal), first March 21, 2016. 9 WG drafts.
Last call announced 2018-10-12, draft 05
IESG evaluation starts 2018-11-28, draft 07
Approved 2018-12-10, draft 08
Auth 48 2019-01-28
Auth 48 complete 2019-02-13
Published 2019-02-15
IANA Action, table rows added.
~~~

Copy edit for style, but also clarification of ambiguous sentences.

No references on Google Scholar.

## 8479
Storing Validation Parameters in PKCS#8 {{?RFC8479}}

~~~
Informational, 8 pages. Independent stream.
5 personal drafts (personal), first August 8, 2017.
ISE review started 2018-03-29, draft 02
IETF conflict review and IESG review started 2018-03-29
Approved 2018-08-20, draft 03
Auth 48 2018-09-20, draft 04
Auth 48 complete 2018-09-25
Published 2018-09-26
~~~

Very minor set of copy edit, moving some references from normative to informative.

No reference on Google Scholar.

## 8453
Framework for Abstraction and Control of TE Networks (ACTN) {{?RFC8453}}

~~~
Informational, 42 pages.
3 personal drafts, first June 15, 2015. 16 WG drafts.
Out of WG 2018-01-26, draft 11
Expert review requested, 2018-02-13
Last call announced 2018-04-16, draft 13
IESG evaluation starts 2018-05-16, draft 14
Approved 2018-06-01, draft 15
Auth 48 2018-08-13
Auth 48 complete 2018-08-20
Published 2018-08-20
IANA Action, table rows added.
~~~

Minor copy editing.

8 references on Google Scholar.

## 8429
Deprecate Triple-DES (3DES) and RC4 in Kerberos {{?RFC8429}}

~~~
Informational, 42 pages.
6 WG, first 5/1/2017.
Last call announced 7/16/2017, draft 03
IESG evaluation starts 8/18/2017, draft 04
Approved 5/25/2018, draft 05
Auth 48 7/24/2018
Auth 48 complete 10/31/2018
Published 10/31/2018
IANA Action, table rows added.
~~~

Minor copy editing, for style.

1 reference on Google Scholar.

The document was sent back to the WG after the first last call,
edited, and then there was a second last call. There were significant
discussions about the process for deprecating specs and marking them obsolete at the same time.

## 8312
CUBIC for Fast Long-Distance Networks {{?RFC8312}}

~~~
Informational, 18 pages.
2 personal drafts, first 9/1/2014. 8 WG drafts
Last call announced 9/18/2017, draft 06
IESG evaluation starts 2017-11-14
Approved 2017-10-04, draft 07
Auth 48 2018-01-08
Auth 48 complete 2018-02-07
Published 2018-02-07
IANA Action, table rows added.
~~~

Minor copy editing, for style.

9 references on Google Scholar.

Much of the delay, from 2014 to 2015, was waiting fro WG adoption. There was another
2 years spent debating the draft in the WG.

## 8492
Secure Password Ciphersuites for Transport Layer Security (TLS) {{?RFC8492}}

~~~
Informational, 40 pages. (Independent Stream)
10 personal drafts, first 9/2/2012. 8 WG drafts
ISE review started 2017-05-10, draft 01
IETF conflict review and IESG review started 2017-09-04
Approved 2017-10-29, draft 04
Auth 48 10/19/2018, draft 05
Auth 48 complete 2/19/2019
Published 2/21/2019
IANA Action, table rows added.
~~~

Minor copy editing, for style.

2 references on Google Scholar.

This RFC has a complex history. The first individual draft was submitted to the
TLS working group on September 7, 2012. It progressed there, and was adopted
by the WG after 3 revisions. There were then 8 revisions in the TLS WG,
until the WG decided to not progress it. The draft was parked in 2013by
the WG chairs after failing to get consensus in WG last call. The AD finally
pulled the plug in 2016, and the draft was then resubmitted to the ISE.

One year elapsed between submisson to RSE and AUTH48. Need to ask why.

Four months elapsed between AUTH48 started and done. Need to ask the author why.

Changes in AUTH48 include added reference to TLS 1.3, copey-editing for style,
some added requirements, added paragraphs, change in algorithms specification,

## 8378
Signal-Free Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP) Multicast {{?RFC8378}}

~~~
Experimental, 21 pages.
5 personal drafts, first 2/28/2014. 10 WG drafts
Last call announced 2018-02-13, draft 07
IESG evaluation starts 2018-02-28, draft 08
Approved 2018-03-12, draft 09
Auth 48 2018-04-23
Auth 48 complete 2018-05-02
Published 2018-05-02
~~~

Minor copy editing, for style.

1 reference on Google Scholar.

## 8361
Transparent Interconnection of Lots of Links (TRILL):
Centralized Replication for Active-Active Broadcast,
Unknown Unicast, and Multicast (BUM) Traffic {{?RFC8361}}

~~~
Proposed Standard, 17 pages.
3 personal drafts, first 11/12/2013. 14 WG drafts
Last call announced 2017-11-28, draft 10
IESG evaluation starts 2017-12-18, draft 11
Approved 2018-01-29, draft 13
Auth 48 2018-09-17
Auth 48 complete 4/9/2018
Published 2018-10-08
~~~

Minor copy editing, for style.

1 reference on Google Scholar.

## 8472
Transport Layer Security (TLS) Extension for Token Binding Protocol Negotiation {{?RFC8361}}

~~~
Proposed Standard, 8 pages.
1 personal drafts, first 5/29/2015. 15 WG drafts
Last call announced 2017-11-13, draft 10
IESG evaluation starts 2018-03-19
Approved 2018-07-20, draft 14
Auth 48 2018-09-25
Auth 48 complete 4/9/2018
Published 2018-04-12
~~~

Minor copy editing, for style, with the addition of a reference to TLS 1.3.

5 references on Google Scholar.

## 8466
A YANG Data Model for Layer 2 Virtual Private Network (L2VPN) Service Delivery {{?RFC8466}}

~~~
Proposed Standard, 158 pages.
5 personal drafts, first 9/1/2016. 11 WG drafts
Last call announced 2018-02-21, draft 07
IESG evaluation starts 2018-03-14, draft 08
Approved 2018-06-25, draft 10
Auth 48 2018-09-17
Auth 48 complete 2018-10-09
Published 2018-10-12
~~~

Copy editing for style and clarity, with also corrections to the yang model.

2 references on Google Scholar.

## 8362
OSPFv3 Link State Advertisement (LSA) Extensibility {{?RFC8362}}

~~~
Proposed Standard, 33 pages.
4 personal drafts, first February 17, 2013. 24 WG drafts
Last call announced 2017-12-19, draft 19
IESG evaluation starts 2018-01-18, draft 20
Approved 2018-01-29, draft 23
Auth 48 2018-03-19
Auth 48 complete 2018-03-30
Published 2018-04-03
~~~

Copy editing for style and clarity.

7 references on Google Scholar.

First submitted as a personal draft in the IPv6 WG, then moved to the OSPF WG.

## 8468
IPv4, IPv6, and IPv4-IPv6 Coexistence: Updates for the IP
Performance Metrics (IPPM) Framework {{?rfc8468}}

~~~
Informational, 15 pages.
3 personal drafts, first August 6, 2015. 7 WG drafts
Last call announced 2018-04-11, draft 04
IESG evaluation starts 2018-05-24, draft 05
Approved 2018-07-10, draft 06
Auth 48 2018-09-13
Auth 48 complete 2018-11-05
Published 2018-11-14
~~~

Copy editing for style and clarity.

2 references on Google Scholar.

First submitted as a personal draft in the IPv6 WG, then moved to the OSPF WG.


--- back










